Add MongoDB with Panache extension (#3650)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/mongodb-panache-guide.adoc

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/master/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Quarkus - Simplified MongoDB with Panache

include::./attributes.adoc[]
:config-file: application.properties

> MongoDB is a well known NoSQL Database that is widely used, but using its raw API can be cumbersome as you need to express your entities and your queries as MongoDB Document.

Author: Done. I add a link to the documentation of Document on not the JavaDoc.
I also add a section regarding mongodb with panache in the mongodb client guide.

> MongoDB with Panache provides active record style entities (and repositories) like you have in Hibernate ORM with Panache and focuses on making your entities trivial and fun to write in Quarkus.

Author: done

== First: an example

Panache allows you to write your MongoDB entities like this:

[source,java]
--
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntity {
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;

    public static Person findByName(String name){
      return find("name", name).firstResult();
    }

    public static List<Person> findAlive(){
      return list("status", Status.Alive);
    }

    public static void deleteStefs(){
      delete("name", "Stef");
    }
}
--

You have noticed how much more compact and readable the code is compared to using the MongoDB API ?
Does this look interesting? Read on!

> NOTE: the `list()` method might be surprising at first. It takes fragments of PanacheQL queries (subset of JPQL) and contextualize the rest.

Author: Done.
I'll backport to the hibernate-orm-with-panache guide on a folloup PR all the typos/wordings changes to align both.

> NOTE: the `list()` method might be surprising at first. It takes fragments of PanacheQL queries (subset of JPQL) and contextualize the rest.

Reviewer: Thanks.

That makes for very concise but yet readable code.
MongoDB native queries are also supported.

> == Solution

Author: A lot of guides use this term ... 
I understand it as "this is the solution if you don't want to follow the guide"

> == Solution

Reviewer: Sorry, my bad. I didn't know, and you're right. I find it very confusing myself and I think it's a mistake, but you're right it's consistent.

        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-mongodb-panache</artifactId>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
--

== Setting up and configuring MongoDB with Panache

To get started:

* add your settings in `{config-file}`
* Make your entities extend `PanacheMongoEntity`, you can use the `@MongoEntity` annotation to specify the name of the database and the name of the collection (it will default to the name of your entity).
* place your entity logic in static methods in your entities

Then add the relevant configuration properties in `{config-file}`.

[source,properties]
--
# configure the MongoDB client for a replica set of two nodes
quarkus.mongodb.connection-string = mongodb://mongo1:27017,mongo2:27017
# mandatory if you don't specify the name of the database using @MongoEntity
quarkus.mongodb.database = person
--

The `quarkus.mongodb.database` property will be used by MongoDB with Panache to determine the name of the database where your entities will be persisted.

For advanced configuration of the MongoDB client, you can follow the link:mongo-guide.html#configuring-the-mongodb-database[Configuring the MongoDB database].

== Defining your entity

> To define a Panache entity, simply extend `PanacheMongoEntity`, annotate it with `@MongoEntity` and add your

Author: I rephrase it, it's "could".

To define a Panache entity, simply extend `PanacheMongoEntity` and add your columns as public fields.

> You can add the `@MongoEntity` annotation to your entity if need to customize the name of the collection and/or the database.

Reviewer: s/if need/if you need/

Author: done

--
@MongoEntity(collection="ThePerson")
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntity {
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;
}
--

> NOTE: annotating with `@MongoEntity` is optional, it allows to configure the name of the collection and the name of the database. Here the entity will be stored in the `ThePerson` collection instead of the default `Person` collection.

Author: done

> MongoDB with Panache uses the link:https://mongodb.github.io/mongo-java-driver/3.10/bson/pojos/[PojoCodecProvider] to map your entities to MongoDB Document. 

Author: I use singular. As there is a link at the top of the doc I don't repeat it everywhere

You will be allowed to use the following annotations to customize this mapping:

> - `@BsonId`: customize the id field, by default it's the field named `id` and of type `ObjectId`.

Author: Simplified + link to the section

- `@BsonProperty`: customize the serialized name of the field.
- `@BsonIgnore`: ignore a field during the serialization.

If you need to write accessors, you can:

[source,java]
--
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntity {
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;

    // return name as uppercase in the model
    public String getName(){
      return name.toUppercase();
    }

    // store all names in lowercase in the DB
    public String setName(String name){
      this.name = name.toLowercase();
    }
}
--

And thanks to our field access rewrite, when your users read `person.name` they will actually call your `getName()` accessor, and similarly for field writes and the setter.
This allows for proper encapsulation at runtime as all fields calls will be replaced by the corresponding getter/setter calls.

== Most useful operations

Once you have written your entity, here are the most common operations you will be able to do:

[source,java]
--
// creating a person
Person person = new Person();

> person.name = "Stef";

Author: :) OK

person.birth = LocalDate.of(1910, Month.FEBRUARY, 1);
person.status = Status.Alive;

// persist it

> person.persist();

Author: We need to specify that entity needs to be explicitly updated yes. 
But per request of @emmanuelbernard I made the `persist()` method able to both insert and update (it's a replaceOne wiht upsert enabled). This is the last open point of my PR: whether or not I keep insert/update/persist or just persist ?

> person.persist();

Reviewer: OK, but that's orthogonal to making sure people are away that an "update" operation (whatever its name) is required because the entity is not "managed".

> person.persist();

Author: I added the following note:
```
NOTE: The `persist()` method needs to be called each time you do a modification to your entity.
```

> person.persist();

Reviewer: I would put your note right below like this (if we go for a single `persist` method):

```java
person.status = Status.Dead;

// Your must call persist() again in order to send your entity modifications to MongoDB
person.persist();
```

This gives us a clearer workflow example.

> person.persist();

Author: done

== Sorting

All methods accepting a query string also accept an optional `Sort` parameter, which allows you to abstract your sorting:

[source,java]
--
List<Person> persons = Person.list(Sort.by("name").and("birth"));

// and with more restrictions
List<Person> persons = Person.list("status", Sort.by("name").and("birth"), Status.Alive);
--

The `Sort` class has plenty of methods for adding columns and specifying sort direction.

== Adding entity methods

In general, we recommend not adding custom queries for your entities outside of the entities themselves,
to keep all model queries close to the models they operate on. So we recommend adding them as static methods
in your entity class:

[source,java]
--
@MongoEntity
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntity {
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;

    public static Person findByName(String name){
      return find("name", name).firstResult();
    }

    public static List<Person> findAlive(){
      return list("status", Status.Alive);
    }

    public static void deleteStefs(){
      delete("name", "Stef");
    }
}
--

== Simplified queries

> Normally, MongoDB queries are of this form: `{'firstname': 'John', 'lastname':'Doe'}`, this is what we called MongoDB native queries.

Author: done

> You can use them if you want, but we also support what we call **PanacheQL** that can be seen as a subset of JP-QL (or HQL) and allows to easily express a query.

Author: I add both links
typo corrected

MongoDB with Panache will then map it to a MongoDB native query.

> If your query does not start with `{`, we will consider it a PanacheQL query

Author: done

- `<singleColumnName>` (and single parameter) which will expand to `{'singleColumnName': '?'}`
- `<query>` will expand to `{<query>}` where we will map the PanacheQL query to MongoDB native query form. We support the following operators that will be mapped to the corresponding MongoDB operators: 'and', 'or' ( mixing 'and' and 'or' is not currently supported), '=', '>', '>=', '<', '<=', '!=', 'is null', 'is not null', and 'like' that is mapped to the MongoDB `$regex` operator.

Here are some query examples:

- `firstname = ?1 and status = ?2` will be mapped to `{'firstname': ?1, 'status': ?2}`
- `amount > ?1 and firstname != ?2` will be mapped to `{'amount': {'$gt': ?1}, 'firstname': {'$ne': ?2}}`
- `lastname like ?1` will be mapped to `{'lastname': {'$regex': ?1}}`. Be careful that this will be link:https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/operator/query/regex/#op._S_regex[MongoDB regex] support and not SQL like pattern. 
- `lastname is not null` will be mapped to `{'lastname':{'$exists': true}}`

> We also handle some basic Date type transformation: all fields of type `Date`, `LocalDate` or `LocalDateTime` will be mapped to the MongoDB `ISODate` type.

Author: No, its generic date types, I enumerate all the supported date types. I remove the uppercase.
I also add some more details on what type of date is used and a link to the documentation.

You can pass query parameters, for both native and PanacheQL queries, by index (1-based) as shown below:

[source,java]
--
Person.find("name = ?1 and status = ?2", "stef", Status.Alive);
Person.find("{'name': ?1, 'status': ?2}", "stef", Status.Alive);
--

Or by name using a `Map`:

[source,java]
--
Map<String, Object> params = new HashMap<>();
params.put("name", "stef");
params.put("status", Status.Alive);
Person.find("name = :name and status = :status", params);
Person.find("{'name': :name, 'status', :status}", params);
--

Or using the convenience class `Parameters` to either build a `Map` or just used as-is:

[source,java]
--
// generate a Map
Person.find("name = :name and status = :status",
         Parameters.with("name", "stef").and("status", Status.Alive).map());

// use it as-is
Person.find("{'name': :name, 'status': :status}",
         Parameters.with("name", "stef").and("status", Status.Alive));
--

Every query operation accepts passing parameters by index (`Object...`), or by name (`Map<String,Object>` or `Parameters`).

== Query projection

Query projection can be done with the `project()` method on the PanacheQuery object that is returned by the `find()` method.

> You can use it to restrict which fields will be returned by the database. Note that the `_id` field will always be returned.

Author: I rephrase to "the ID field of your entity" as this is used across the guide.

[source,java]
--
// only 'name' and 'id' fields will be returned

> Person.find("status ", "Status.Alive).project("name");

Author: Done: `PanacheQuery<Person> query = `

Person.find("{'status': ?1}", Status.Alive).project("name");
--

== The DAO/Repository option

Look, we get it: you have a love/hate relationship with DAOs/Repositories but you can't live without them. We don't judge, we know life is tough and we've got you covered.

If you want to have Repositories, you can get the exact same convenient methods injected in your Repository by making it
implement `PanacheMongoRepository`:

[source,java]
--
@ApplicationScoped
public class PersonRepository implements PanacheMongoRepository<Person> {

   // put your custom logic here as instance methods

   public Person findByName(String name){
     return find("name", name).firstResult();
   }

   public List<Person> findAlive(){
     return list("status", Status.Alive);
   }

   public void deleteStefs(){
     delete("name", "Stef");
  }
}
--

Absolutely all the operations that are defined on `PanacheMongoEntityBase` are available on your DAO, so using it
is exactly the same except you need to inject it:

[source,java]
--
@Inject
PersonRepository personRepository;

@GET
public long count(){
  return personRepository.count();
}
--

> So if Repositories are your thing, you can keep doing them. Even with repositories, you can keep your entities as

Author: Can. And with MongoDB you even can omit an id field!

subclasses of `PanacheMongoEntity` in order to get the ID and public fields working, but you can even skip that and
go back to specifying your ID and using getters and setters if that's your thing. We're not judging.

== Transactions

> MongoDB offers ACID transactions since version 4.0. MongoDB with Panache doesn't provide support for them.

Author: I'll open a followup issue for this.

== Custom IDs

> IDs are often a touchy subject, in MongoDB they are usually auto-generated by the database with an `ObjectId`. 

Author: Yes, done

In MongoDB with Panache the ID are defined by a field named `id` of the `org.bson.types.ObjectId` type,
but if you want ot customize them, once again we have you covered.

You can specify your own ID strategy by extending `PanacheMongoEntityBase` instead of `PanacheMongoEntity`. Then
you just declare whatever ID you want as a public field by annotating it by @BsonId:

[source,java]
--
@MongoEntity
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntityBase {

  @BsonId
  public Integer myId;

 ...
}
--

If you're using repositories, then you will want to extend `PanacheMongoRepositoryBase` instead of `PanacheMongoRepository`
and specify your ID type as an extra type parameter:

[source,java]
--
@ApplicationScoped
public class PersonRepository implements PanacheMongoRepositoryBase<Person,Integer> {

 ...
}
--

[NOTE]
====
When using `ObjectId`, MongoDB will automatically provide a value for you, but if you use a custom field type,
you need to provide the value by yourself.
====

`ObjectId` can be difficult to use if you want to expose its value in your rest service.

> So we create JSON-B providers to serialize/deserialize them as String and also Jackson equivalent.

Author: done

> JSON-B providers and Jackson serializer/deserializer are automatically registered as soon as one of Resteasy with JSON-B or Resteasy with Jackson extensions are used.

Author: done

- Duplicating ID logic: most entities need an ID, most people don't care how it's set, because it's not really
relevant to your model.
- Dumb getters and setters: since Java lacks support for properties in the language, we have to create fields,
then generate getters and setters for those fields, even if they don't actually do anything more than read/write
the fields.
- Traditional EE patterns advise to split entity definition (the model) from the operations you can do on them
(DAOs, Repositories), but really that requires an unnatural split between the state and its operations even though
we would never do something like that for regular objects in the Object Oriented architecture, where state and methods are in the same class. Moreover, this requires two classes per entity, and requires injection of the DAO or Repository where you need to do entity operations, which breaks your edit flow and requires you to get out of the code you're writing to set up an injection point before coming back to use it.
- MongoDB queries are super powerful, but overly verbose for common operations, requiring you to write queries even
when you don't need all the parts.

> - MongoDB queries are JSON based, so you will need some String manipulation or using the `Document` type and it will needs a lot of boilerplate code.

Author: done

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/master/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Quarkus - Simplified MongoDB with Panache

include::./attributes.adoc[]
:config-file: application.properties

MongoDB is a well known NoSQL Database that is widely used, but using it's raw API can be cumberson as you need to express your entities and your queries in MongoDB Document.

> MongoDB with Panache will provides active record style entities (and repositories) like you have in Hibernate ORM with Panache and focuses on making your entities trivial and fun to write in Quarkus.

Reviewer 2: MongoDB with Panache  ~will~ provides

Author: done

== First: an example

What we're doing in Panache is allow you to write your MongoDB entities like this:

[source,java]
--
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntity {
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;

    public static Person findByName(String name){
      return find("name", name).firstResult();
    }

    public static List<Person> findAlive(){
      return list("status", Status.Alive);
    }

    public static void deleteStefs(){
      delete("name", "Stef");
    }
}
--

You have noticed how much more compact and readable the code is?
Does this look interesting? Read on!

> NOTE: the `list()` method might be surprising at first. It takes fragments of PancheQL queries (subset of JPQL) and contextualize the rest. That makes for very concise but yet readable code. Native MongoDB queries are also supported.

Reviewer 2: /s/PancheQL/PanacheQL

Reviewer 2: /s/That makes for very concise/That makes for very a concise

Author: are you sure for the second one? I copied it from Hibernate with Panache guide ...

Author: first one done

After this, the quarkus-mongodb-panache extension has been added to your `pom.xml`.

If you don't want to generate a new project you can add the dependency in your `pom.xml`:

[source,xml]
--
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-mongodb-panache</artifactId>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
--

== Setting up and configuring MongoDB with Panache

To get started:

* add your settings in `{config-file}`
* Make your entities extend `PanacheMongoEntity`, you can use the `@MongoEntity` annotation to specify the name of the database and the name of the collection (it will default to the name of your entity).
* place your entity logic in static methods in your entities

Follow the link:mongo-guide.html#configuring-the-mongodb-database[Configuring the MongoDB database].

Then add the relevant configuration properties in `{config-file}`.

[source,properties]
--
# configure the mongoDB client for a replica set of two nodes
quarkus.mongodb.connection-string = mongodb://mongo1:27017,mongo2:27017
# mandatory if you don't specify the name of the database using @MongoEntity
quarkus.mongodb.database = person
--

> The `quarkus.mongodb.databas` property will be used by MongoDB Panache to detemine the name of the database where your entities will be persisted.

Reviewer 2: /s/ `quarkus.mongodb.databas`/ `quarkus.mongodb.database`

Reviewer 2: /s/detemine/determine

Author: done

== Defining your entity

To define a Panache entity, simply extend `PanacheMongoEntity`, annotate it with `@MongoEntity` and add your
columns as public fields:

[source,java]
--
@MongoEntity(collection="ThePerson")
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntity {
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;
}
--

NOTE: annotating with `@MongoEntity` is optional, it allows to configure the name of the collection and the name of the database. Here the entity will be stored in the `ThePerson` collection instead of the default `Person` collection.

MongoDB with Panache uses the link:https://mongodb.github.io/mongo-java-driver/3.10/bson/pojos/[PojoCodecProvider] to map your entities to MongoDB Document. 

> You will be allow to use the following annotations to customize this mapping:

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can rephrase this to:

1. MongoDB Panache allows the use the following annotations to customize this mapping..
*or*
2. You will be allowed to use the following annotations to customize this mapping

Author: second one done

- `@BsonId`: customize the id field, by default it's the `id` field with a `ObjectId` type.
- `@BsonProperty`: customize the serialized name of the field.
- `@BsonIgnore`: ignore a field during the serialization.

If you need to write accessors, you can:

[source,java]
--
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntity {
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;

>     // this will store all names in lowercase in the DB,

Reviewer 2: Maybe split the comment into one comment per accessor
1. the getter comment `return name as  uppercase in the model`
2. the setter comment `will store all names in lowercase in the DB`

Author: copied it from the hibernate with panache guide

Reviewer 2: I know, I thought maybe we can make it clear a bit by the above proposition.

Author: OK? done

sets you can use the `find` method equivalents, which return a `PanacheQuery` on which you can do paging:

[source,java]
--
// create a query for all living persons
PanacheQuery<Person> livingPersons = Person.find("status", Status.Alive);

// specify a projection to limit the fields returned from the database
livingPersons.project("name", "birthdate");

// make it use pages of 25 entries at a time
livingPersons.page(Page.ofSize(25));

// get the first page
List<Person> firstPage = livingPersons.list();

// get the second page
List<Person> secondPage = livingPersons.nextPage().list();

// get page 7
List<Person> page7 = livingPersons.page(Page.of(7, 25)).list();

// get the number of pages
int numberOfPages = livingPersons.pageCount();

// get the total number of entities returned by this query without paging
int count = livingPersons.count();

// and you can chain methods of course
return Person.find("status", Status.Alive)
    .page(Page.ofSize(25))
    .nextPage()
    .stream()
--

The `PanacheQuery` type has many other methods to deal with paging and returning streams.

== Sorting

> All methods accepting a query string also an optional `Sort` parameter, which allows your to abstract your sorting:

Reviewer 2: `All methods accepting a query string also accept an optional `Sort` parameter, which allows your to abstract your sorting`

Author: done

[source,java]
--
List<Person> persons = Person.list(Sort.by("name").and("birth"));

// and with more restrictions
List<Person> persons = Person.list("status", Sort.by("name").and("birth"), Status.Alive);
--

The `Sort` class has plenty of methods for adding columns and specifying sort direction.

== Adding entity methods

In general, we recommend not adding custom queries for your entities outside of the entities themselves,
to keep all model queries close to the models they operate on. So we recommend adding them as static methods
in your entity class:

[source,java]
--
@MongoEntity
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntity {
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;

    public static Person findByName(String name){
      return find("name", name).firstResult();
    }

    public static List<Person> findAlive(){
      return list("status", Status.Alive);
    }

    public static void deleteStefs(){
      delete("name", "Stef");
    }
}
--

== Simplified queries

> Normally, MongoDB queries are of this form: `{'firstname': 'John', 'lastname':'Doe'}`, this is what we called native MongoDB queries.

Reviewer 2: `..this is what we call MongoDB native queries`

Author: done

> You can use them if you want, but we also support what we called **PanacheQL** that can be seen as a subset of JP-QL (or HQL) and allow to easily express a query. MongoDB Panache will then map it to native MongoDB query.

Reviewer 2: `.. what we call **PanacheQL**  `

Author: done

If your query does not start with `{`, we will imply PanacheQL query

- `<singleColumnName>` (and single parameter) which will expand to `{'singleColumnName': '?'}`
- `<query>` will expand to `{<query>}` where we will map the PanacheQL query to MongoDB native query form. We support the following operators that will be mapped to the corresponding MongoDB operators: 'and', 'or' ( mixing 'and' and 'or' is not currently supported), '=', '>', '>=', '<', '<=', '!=', 'is null', 'is not null', and 'like' that is mapped to the MongoDB `$regex` operator.

Here are some query examples:

- `firstname = ?1 and status = ?2` will be mapped to `{'firstname': ?1, 'status': ?2}`
- `amount > ?1 and firstname != ?2` will be mapped to `{'amount': {'$gt': ?1}, 'firstname': {'$ne': ?2}}`
- `lastname like ?1` will be mapped to `{'lastname': {'$regex': ?1}}`. Be careful that this will be link:https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/operator/query/regex/#op._S_regex[MongoDB regex] support and not SQL like pattern. 
- `lastname is not null` will be mapped to `{'lastname':{'$exists': true}}`

> We will also handle some basic Date type transofmation: all fields of type `Date`, `LocalDate` or `LocalDateTime` will be mapped to MongoDB `ISODate` type.

Reviewer 2: /s/We will also/We also

Author: done

> MongoDB Panache also support extented MongoDB queries by providing a `Document` query, this is supported by the find/list/stream/cout/delete methods.

Reviewer 2: /s/MongoDB Panache also support /MongoDB Panache also supports

Author: done

== Query parameters

> You can pass query parameters, for both native and PanacheQL queries, by index (1-based):

Reviewer 2: `You can pass query parameters, for both native and PanacheQL queries, by index (1-based) as shown below:`

Author: done

[source,java]
--
Person.find("name = ?1 and status = ?2", "stef", Status.Alive);
Person.find("{'name': ?1, 'status': ?2}", "stef", Status.Alive);
--

Or by name using a `Map`:

[source,java]
--
Map<String, Object> params = new HashMap<>();
params.put("name", "stef");
params.put("status", Status.Alive);
Person.find("name = :name and status = :status", params);
Person.find("{'name': :name, 'status', :status}", params);
--

Or using the convenience class `Parameters` to either build a `Map` or just use as-is:

[source,java]
--
// generate a Map
Person.find("name = :name and status = :status",
         Parameters.with("name", "stef").and("status", Status.Alive).map());

// use it as-is
Person.find("{'name': :name, 'status': :status}",
         Parameters.with("name", "stef").and("status", Status.Alive));
--

Every query operation accepts passing parameters by index (`Object...`), or by name (`Map<String,Object>` or `Parameters`).

== Query projection

Query projection can be done with the `project()` method on the PanacheQuery object that is returned by the `find()` method.

> You can use it to restrict witch fields will be returned by the database. Note that the `_id` field will always be returned.

Reviewer 2: /s/witch/which

Author: done

go back to specifying your ID and using getters and setters if that's your thing. We're not judging.

== Transactions

MongoDB offers ACID transactions since version 4.0. MongoDB with Panache doesn't provides support for them.

== Custom IDs

IDs are often a touchy subject, in MongoDB they are usually auto-generated by the database with an `ObjectId`. 
In MongoDB with Panache the ID are defined by a field name `id` of the `org.bson.types.ObjectId` type, but if you want ot customize them, once again we have you covered.

You can specify your own ID strategy by extending `PanacheMongoEntityBase` instead of `PanacheMongoEntity`. Then
you just declare whatever ID you want as a public field by annotating it by @BsonId:

[source,java]
--
@MongoEntity
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntityBase {

  @BsonId
  public Integer myId;

 ...
}
--

If you're using repositories, then you will want to extend `PanacheMongoRepositoryBase` instead of `PanacheMongoRepository` and specify your ID type as an extra type parameter:

[source,java]
--
@ApplicationScoped
public class PersonRepository implements PanacheMongoRepositoryBase<Person,Integer> {

 ...
}
--

[NOTE]
====

> When using `ObjectId`, MongoDB will automatically provides a value for you, but if you use a custom field type, you need to provides yourself the value.

Reviewer 2: /s/provides/provide

Author: done

====

> `ObjectId` can be difficult to use if you want to expose it's value in your rest service. So we create JsonB provides to serialize/deserialize them as String. These provides are not registered by default so you need to register them with a JAXRS `ContextResolver`:

Reviewer 2: /s/it's/its

Reviewer 2: /s/JsonB provides/JsonB providers

Author: done

that are missing, and rewrite every access to these fields to use the accessor methods. This way you can still
write _useful_ accessors when you need them, which will be used even though your entity users still use field accesses.
- Don't use DAOs or Repositories: put all your entity logic in static methods in your entity class. Your entity superclass comes with lots of super useful static methods and you can add your own in your entity class. Users can just start using your entity `Person` by typing `Person.` and getting completion for all the operations in a single place.
- Don't write parts of the query that you don't need: write `Person.find("order by name")` or
`Person.find("name = ?1 and status = ?2", "stef", Status.Alive)` or even better `Person.find("name", "stef")`.

That's all there is to it: with Panache, MongoDBhas never looked so trim and neat.

== Defining entities in external projects or jars

MongoDB with Panacge relies on compile-time bytecode enhancements to your entities. 
If you define your entities in the same project where you build your Quarkus application, everything will work fine. 

> If the entities come from external projects or jars, you can make sure that your jar is treated like a Quarkus application library by adding an empty `META-INF/beans.xml` file.

Reviewer 2: If this https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/3545 lands, we may need a link to it here.

Reviewer 2: So the cited PR has landed, maybe we can add a reference to `How to Generate a Jandex Index` section?

Reviewer 3: Yes please do that.

Author: Done. If the phrasing is OK I can update the hibernate guide with the same one.

Author: @gsmet is the new phrasing OK? Should I update the hibernate guide with it ?

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/master/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Quarkus - Simplified MongoDB with Panache

include::./attributes.adoc[]
:config-file: application.properties

> MongoDB is a well known NoSQL Database that is widely used, but using it's raw API can be cumberson as you need to express your entities and your queries in MongoDB Document.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
MongoDB is a well known NoSQL Database that is widely used, but using its raw API can be cumbersome as you need to express your entities and your queries as MongoDB Document.
```

Author: done

MongoDB with Panache provides active record style entities (and repositories) like you have in Hibernate ORM with Panache and focuses on making your entities trivial and fun to write in Quarkus.

== First: an example

> What we're doing in Panache is allow you to write your MongoDB entities like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Panache allows you to write your MongoDB entities like this:
```

Author: done

[source,java]
--
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntity {
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;

    public static Person findByName(String name){
      return find("name", name).firstResult();
    }

    public static List<Person> findAlive(){
      return list("status", Status.Alive);
    }

    public static void deleteStefs(){
      delete("name", "Stef");
    }
}
--

> You have noticed how much more compact and readable the code is?

Reviewer 3: Compared to what?

Author: copy/pasted from the JPA guide :)
Compared to using the MongoDB API directly but I can remove this sentence if you prefere

Reviewer 3: Well, you can precise `compared to using the MongoDB API` if it's true and immediately visible to a person used to this API. If it's not, I would remove it.

Author: Done, it's the purpose of the extension so let's be clear of what we want to achieve here :)

[source,shell,subs=attributes+]
----
mvn io.quarkus:quarkus-maven-plugin:{quarkus-version}:create \
    -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \
    -DprojectArtifactId=using-mongodb-panache \
    -DclassName="org.acme.rest.json.FruitResource" \
    -Dpath="/fruits" \
    -Dextensions="resteasy-jsonb,mongodb-panache"
----

This command generates a Maven structure importing the RESTEasy/JAX-RS, JSON-B and MongoDB with Panache extensions.
After this, the quarkus-mongodb-panache extension has been added to your `pom.xml`.

If you don't want to generate a new project you can add the dependency in your `pom.xml`:

[source,xml]
--
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-mongodb-panache</artifactId>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
--

== Setting up and configuring MongoDB with Panache

To get started:

* add your settings in `{config-file}`
* Make your entities extend `PanacheMongoEntity`, you can use the `@MongoEntity` annotation to specify the name of the database and the name of the collection (it will default to the name of your entity).
* place your entity logic in static methods in your entities

> Follow the link:mongo-guide.html#configuring-the-mongodb-database[Configuring the MongoDB database].

Reviewer 3: Do we really want people to go to this guide and follow it or should it only be given as a reference after the configuration?

Author: I move it at the end of the paragraph and transform the sentence as a reference link not a link to follow before continuing.

Then add the relevant configuration properties in `{config-file}`.

[source,properties]
--

> # configure the mongoDB client for a replica set of two nodes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# configure the MongoDB client for a replica set of two nodes
```

Author: done

quarkus.mongodb.connection-string = mongodb://mongo1:27017,mongo2:27017
# mandatory if you don't specify the name of the database using @MongoEntity
quarkus.mongodb.database = person
--

The `quarkus.mongodb.database` property will be used by MongoDB with Panache to determine the name of the database where your entities will be persisted.

== Defining your entity

To define a Panache entity, simply extend `PanacheMongoEntity`, annotate it with `@MongoEntity` and add your
columns as public fields:

[source,java]
--
@MongoEntity(collection="ThePerson")
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntity {
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;
}
--

NOTE: annotating with `@MongoEntity` is optional, it allows to configure the name of the collection and the name of the database. Here the entity will be stored in the `ThePerson` collection instead of the default `Person` collection.

MongoDB with Panache uses the link:https://mongodb.github.io/mongo-java-driver/3.10/bson/pojos/[PojoCodecProvider] to map your entities to MongoDB Document. 

You will be allowed to use the following annotations to customize this mapping:

> - `@BsonId`: customize the id field, by default it's the `id` field with a `ObjectId` type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `@BsonId`: customize the id field, by default it's the field named `id` and of type `ObjectId`.
```

Author: done

sets you can use the `find` method equivalents, which return a `PanacheQuery` on which you can do paging:

[source,java]
--
// create a query for all living persons
PanacheQuery<Person> livingPersons = Person.find("status", Status.Alive);

// specify a projection to limit the fields returned from the database
livingPersons.project("name", "birthdate");

// make it use pages of 25 entries at a time
livingPersons.page(Page.ofSize(25));

// get the first page
List<Person> firstPage = livingPersons.list();

// get the second page
List<Person> secondPage = livingPersons.nextPage().list();

// get page 7
List<Person> page7 = livingPersons.page(Page.of(7, 25)).list();

// get the number of pages
int numberOfPages = livingPersons.pageCount();

// get the total number of entities returned by this query without paging
int count = livingPersons.count();

// and you can chain methods of course
return Person.find("status", Status.Alive)
    .page(Page.ofSize(25))
    .nextPage()
    .stream()
--

The `PanacheQuery` type has many other methods to deal with paging and returning streams.

== Sorting

> All methods accepting a query string also accept an optional `Sort` parameter, which allows your to abstract your sorting:

Reviewer 2: s/allows your/allows you

Author: done

[source,java]
--
List<Person> persons = Person.list(Sort.by("name").and("birth"));

// and with more restrictions
List<Person> persons = Person.list("status", Sort.by("name").and("birth"), Status.Alive);
--

The `Sort` class has plenty of methods for adding columns and specifying sort direction.

== Adding entity methods

In general, we recommend not adding custom queries for your entities outside of the entities themselves,
to keep all model queries close to the models they operate on. So we recommend adding them as static methods
in your entity class:

[source,java]
--
@MongoEntity
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntity {
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;

    public static Person findByName(String name){
      return find("name", name).firstResult();
    }

    public static List<Person> findAlive(){
      return list("status", Status.Alive);
    }

    public static void deleteStefs(){
      delete("name", "Stef");
    }
}
--

== Simplified queries

Normally, MongoDB queries are of this form: `{'firstname': 'John', 'lastname':'Doe'}`, this is what we called MongoDB native queries.

> You can use them if you want, but we also support what we call **PanacheQL** that can be seen as a subset of JP-QL (or HQL) and allow to easily express a query.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use them if you want, but we also support what we call **PanacheQL** that can be seen as a subset of JP-QL (or HQL) and allows to easily express a query.
```

Author: done

> MongoDB with Panache will then map it to MongoDB native query.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
MongoDB with Panache will then map it to a MongoDB native query.
```

Author: done

> If your query does not start with `{`, we will imply PanacheQL query

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If your query does not start with `{`, we will consider it a PanacheQL query.
```

Author: done

- `<singleColumnName>` (and single parameter) which will expand to `{'singleColumnName': '?'}`
- `<query>` will expand to `{<query>}` where we will map the PanacheQL query to MongoDB native query form. We support the following operators that will be mapped to the corresponding MongoDB operators: 'and', 'or' ( mixing 'and' and 'or' is not currently supported), '=', '>', '>=', '<', '<=', '!=', 'is null', 'is not null', and 'like' that is mapped to the MongoDB `$regex` operator.

Here are some query examples:

- `firstname = ?1 and status = ?2` will be mapped to `{'firstname': ?1, 'status': ?2}`
- `amount > ?1 and firstname != ?2` will be mapped to `{'amount': {'$gt': ?1}, 'firstname': {'$ne': ?2}}`
- `lastname like ?1` will be mapped to `{'lastname': {'$regex': ?1}}`. Be careful that this will be link:https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/operator/query/regex/#op._S_regex[MongoDB regex] support and not SQL like pattern. 
- `lastname is not null` will be mapped to `{'lastname':{'$exists': true}}`

> We also handle some basic Date type transofmation: all fields of type `Date`, `LocalDate` or `LocalDateTime` will be mapped to MongoDB `ISODate` type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We also handle some basic Date type transformation: all fields of type `Date`, `LocalDate` or `LocalDateTime` will be mapped to the MongoDB `ISODate` type.
```

Author: done

> MongoDB with Panache also supports extented MongoDB queries by providing a `Document` query, this is supported by the find/list/stream/cout/delete methods.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
MongoDB with Panache also supports extended MongoDB queries by providing a `Document` query, this is supported by the find/list/stream/cout/delete methods.
```

Author: done

== Query parameters

You can pass query parameters, for both native and PanacheQL queries, by index (1-based) as shown below:

[source,java]
--
Person.find("name = ?1 and status = ?2", "stef", Status.Alive);
Person.find("{'name': ?1, 'status': ?2}", "stef", Status.Alive);
--

Or by name using a `Map`:

[source,java]
--
Map<String, Object> params = new HashMap<>();
params.put("name", "stef");
params.put("status", Status.Alive);
Person.find("name = :name and status = :status", params);
Person.find("{'name': :name, 'status', :status}", params);
--

> Or using the convenience class `Parameters` to either build a `Map` or just use as-is:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Or using the convenience class `Parameters` to either build a `Map` or just used as-is:
```

Author: done

[source,java]
--
// generate a Map
Person.find("name = :name and status = :status",
         Parameters.with("name", "stef").and("status", Status.Alive).map());

// use it as-is
Person.find("{'name': :name, 'status': :status}",
         Parameters.with("name", "stef").and("status", Status.Alive));
--

Every query operation accepts passing parameters by index (`Object...`), or by name (`Map<String,Object>` or `Parameters`).

== Query projection

Query projection can be done with the `project()` method on the PanacheQuery object that is returned by the `find()` method.
You can use it to restrict which fields will be returned by the database. Note that the `_id` field will always be returned.

[source,java]
--
// only 'name' and 'id' fields will be returned
Person.find("status ", "Status.Alive).project("name");

> Person.find("{'status': ?1}", Status.Alive).project("name";

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Person.find("{'status': ?1}", Status.Alive).project("name");
```

Author: done

implement `PanacheMongoRepository`:

[source,java]
--
@ApplicationScoped
public class PersonRepository implements PanacheMongoRepository<Person> {

   // put your custom logic here as instance methods

   public Person findByName(String name){
     return find("name", name).firstResult();
   }

   public List<Person> findAlive(){
     return list("status", Status.Alive);
   }

   public void deleteStefs(){
     delete("name", "Stef");
  }
}
--

Absolutely all the operations that are defined on `PanacheMongoEntityBase` are available on your DAO, so using it
is exactly the same except you need to inject it:

[source,java]
--
@Inject
PersonRepository personRepository;

@GET
public long count(){
  return personRepository.count();
}
--

So if Repositories are your thing, you can keep doing them. Even with repositories, you can keep your entities as
subclasses of `PanacheMongoEntity` in order to get the ID and public fields working, but you can even skip that and
go back to specifying your ID and using getters and setters if that's your thing. We're not judging.

== Transactions

> MongoDB offers ACID transactions since version 4.0. MongoDB with Panache doesn't provides support for them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
MongoDB offers ACID transactions since version 4.0. MongoDB with Panache doesn't provide support for them.
```

Author: done

== Custom IDs

IDs are often a touchy subject, in MongoDB they are usually auto-generated by the database with an `ObjectId`. 

> In MongoDB with Panache the ID are defined by a field name `id` of the `org.bson.types.ObjectId` type,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In MongoDB with Panache the ID are defined by a field named `id` of the `org.bson.types.ObjectId` type,
```

Author: done

but if you want ot customize them, once again we have you covered.

You can specify your own ID strategy by extending `PanacheMongoEntityBase` instead of `PanacheMongoEntity`. Then
you just declare whatever ID you want as a public field by annotating it by @BsonId:

[source,java]
--
@MongoEntity
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntityBase {

  @BsonId
  public Integer myId;

 ...
}
--

If you're using repositories, then you will want to extend `PanacheMongoRepositoryBase` instead of `PanacheMongoRepository`
and specify your ID type as an extra type parameter:

[source,java]
--
@ApplicationScoped
public class PersonRepository implements PanacheMongoRepositoryBase<Person,Integer> {

 ...
}
--

[NOTE]
====
When using `ObjectId`, MongoDB will automatically provide a value for you, but if you use a custom field type,

> you need to provides the value by yourself.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
you need to provide the value by yourself.
```

Author: done

====

`ObjectId` can be difficult to use if you want to expose its value in your rest service.

> So we create JsonB providers to serialize/deserialize them as String.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So we create JSON-B providers to serialize/deserialize them as String.
```

Author: done

> So we create JsonB providers to serialize/deserialize them as String.

Reviewer 3: What if you use Jackson?

Author: Yasson serialize/deserialize it as a complex json object.
Jackson throws an exception! I can provide serializer/deserializer to Jackson also.

Author: @gsmet, I add serializer/deserializer as String for Jackson also.

> These providers are not registered by default so you need to register them with a JAXRS `ContextResolver`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These providers are not registered by default so you need to register them with a JAX-RS `ContextResolver`:
```

Author: done

[source,java]
--
import javax.json.bind.Jsonb;
import javax.json.bind.JsonbBuilder;
import javax.json.bind.JsonbConfig;
import javax.ws.rs.ext.ContextResolver;
import javax.ws.rs.ext.Provider;

import io.quarkus.mongodb.panache.jsonb.ObjectIdDeserializer;
import io.quarkus.mongodb.panache.jsonb.ObjectIdSerializer;

@Provider
public class QuarkusJsonbContextResolver implements ContextResolver<Jsonb> {

    public Jsonb getContext(Class clazz) {
        JsonbConfig config = new JsonbConfig();
        config.withSerializers(new ObjectIdSerializer()).withDeserializers(new ObjectIdDeserializer());
        return JsonbBuilder.create(config);
    }

> }

Reviewer 3: It seems a bit unfortunate that you have to manually add this for the default id behavior.

Author: Agreed, it's on the TODO list on the description of the PR :)

But the discussion about how to know if an extension is included needs to more forward because today there is no way to know if JsonB is included (not all extension provides a Capabilities - in fact only Arc and Narayana, so therer is currently no way to know that an extension is included).

Reviewer 3: Well, just add a capability if you need one. You can do that in separate PRs, we will merge them.

Author: OK, will do

Author: In fact, it's more complex that I first thought ...

Moreover the PR #3553, if merged, will change the way serializers/deserializers will be managed.
For the moment, I will update the TODO list with to do it later

Author: @gsmet both JSON-B and Jackson serializer/deserializer are automatically registered if resteasy-jsonb or resteasy-jackson capability is present.

When changing one of these two library we need to carefully review this as it may creates incompabilities (for example an impact analyses needs to be done for PR #3553, and if we add some customization to Jackson ObjectMapper we need to port them to panache-mongo or change the way the ObjectMapper is created).

Fo this to work, I had to create a `resteasy-common-spi` module.

- Duplicating ID logic: most entities need an ID, most people don't care how it's set, because it's not really
relevant to your model.
- Dumb getters and setters: since Java lacks support for properties in the language, we have to create fields,
then generate getters and setters for those fields, even if they don't actually do anything more than read/write
the fields.
- Traditional EE patterns advise to split entity definition (the model) from the operations you can do on them
(DAOs, Repositories), but really that requires an unnatural split between the state and its operations even though
we would never do something like that for regular objects in the Object Oriented architecture, where state and methods are in the same class. Moreover, this requires two classes per entity, and requires injection of the DAO or Repository where you need to do entity operations, which breaks your edit flow and requires you to get out of the code you're writing to set up an injection point before coming back to use it.
- MongoDB queries are super powerful, but overly verbose for common operations, requiring you to write queries even
when you don't need all the parts.

> - MongoDB queries are JSON based, so you will need some String manipulation or using the `Document` type and it will needs a lot of boilerplate code.

Reviewer 3: I don't think the first reasons fly for MongoDB. They are more related to traditional JPA development than to the MongoDB API.

Author: I can rephrase to
> Even if MongoDB queries are not too verbose, PanacheQL go one step further by allowing to not write any queries for basic use cases.
This is a reference to find("name", name) shortcut query.

With Panache, we took an opinionated approach to tackle all these problems:

- Make your entities extend `PanacheMongoEntity`: it has an ID field that is auto-generated. If you require
a custom ID strategy, you can extend `PanacheMongoEntityBase` instead and handle the ID yourself.
- Use public fields. Get rid of dumb getter and setters. Under the hood, we will generate all getters and setters
that are missing, and rewrite every access to these fields to use the accessor methods. This way you can still
write _useful_ accessors when you need them, which will be used even though your entity users still use field accesses.
- Don't use DAOs or Repositories: put all your entity logic in static methods in your entity class. Your entity superclass comes with lots of super useful static methods and you can add your own in your entity class. Users can just start using your entity `Person` by typing `Person.` and getting completion for all the operations in a single place.
- Don't write parts of the query that you don't need: write `Person.find("order by name")` or
`Person.find("name = ?1 and status = ?2", "stef", Status.Alive)` or even better `Person.find("name", "stef")`.

> That's all there is to it: with Panache, MongoDBhas never looked so trim and neat.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
That's all there is to it: with Panache, MongoDB has never looked so trim and neat.
```

Author: done

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/master/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Quarkus - Simplified MongoDB with Panache

include::./attributes.adoc[]
:config-file: application.properties

MongoDB is a well known NoSQL Database that is widely used, but using its raw API can be cumbersome as you need to express your entities and your queries as a MongoDB link:https://mongodb.github.io/mongo-java-driver/3.11/bson/documents/#document[`Document`].

MongoDB with Panache provides active record style entities (and repositories) like you have in link:hibernate-orm-panache-guide.html[Hibernate ORM with Panache] and focuses on making your entities trivial and fun to write in Quarkus.

> It is build on top of the link:mongo-guide.html[MongoDB Client] extension.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is built on top of the link:mongo-guide.html[MongoDB Client] extension.
```

> WARNING: This extension is still experimental, feedback are welcome on the [mailing list](https://groups.google.com/d/forum/quarkus-dev) or as issue in our [github issues tracker](https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
WARNING: This extension is still experimental, feedback is welcome on the https://groups.google.com/d/forum/quarkus-dev[mailing list] or as issues in our https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues[GitHub issue tracker].
```
be careful, you used Markdown links. Please generate the output and check the formatting.

== First: an example

Panache allows you to write your MongoDB entities like this:

[source,java]

> --

Reviewer 3: You should use `----` for source blocks.

Author: Done for all blocks.
It was the same on the hibernate with Panache guide. It will be part of a PR for this guide to align some corrections/typos between the two guides.

public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntity {
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;

    public static Person findByName(String name){
      return find("name", name).firstResult();
    }

    public static List<Person> findAlive(){
      return list("status", Status.Alive);
    }

    public static void deleteLoics(){
      delete("name", "Loïc");
    }
}
--

> You have noticed how much more compact and readable the code is compared to using the MongoDB API ?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You have noticed how much more compact and readable the code is compared to using the MongoDB API?
```

Does this look interesting? Read on!

NOTE: the `list()` method might be surprising at first. It takes fragments of PanacheQL queries (subset of JPQL) and contextualizes the rest.
That makes for very concise but yet readable code.
MongoDB native queries are also supported.

== Solution

We recommend that you follow the instructions in the next sections and create the application step by step.
However, you can go right to the completed example.

Clone the Git repository: `git clone {quickstarts-clone-url}`, or download an {quickstarts-archive-url}[archive].

The solution is located in the `using-mongodb-panache` {quickstarts-tree-url}/using-mongodb-panache[directory].

== Creating the Maven project

First, we need a new project. Create a new project with the following command:

[source,shell,subs=attributes+]
----
mvn io.quarkus:quarkus-maven-plugin:{quarkus-version}:create \
    -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \
    -DprojectArtifactId=using-mongodb-panache \

>     -DclassName="org.acme.rest.json.FruitResource" \

Reviewer 3: The package is probably incorrect.

Author: moved to `org.acme.mongodb.panache`

    -Dpath="/fruits" \
    -Dextensions="resteasy-jsonb,mongodb-panache"
----

This command generates a Maven structure importing the RESTEasy/JAX-RS, JSON-B and MongoDB with Panache extensions.

> After this, the quarkus-mongodb-panache extension has been added to your `pom.xml`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After this, the `quarkus-mongodb-panache` extension has been added to your `pom.xml`.
```

If you don't want to generate a new project you can add the dependency in your `pom.xml`:

[source,xml]

> --

Reviewer 3: Same here about source blocks. I let you check all of them.

Author: done

<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-mongodb-panache</artifactId>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
--

== Setting up and configuring MongoDB with Panache

To get started:

* add your settings in `{config-file}`
* Make your entities extend `PanacheMongoEntity`, you can use the `@MongoEntity` annotation to specify the name of the database and the name of the collection (it will default to the name of your entity).
* place your entity logic in static methods in your entities

Then add the relevant configuration properties in `{config-file}`.

[source,properties]
--
# configure the MongoDB client for a replica set of two nodes
quarkus.mongodb.connection-string = mongodb://mongo1:27017,mongo2:27017
# mandatory if you don't specify the name of the database using @MongoEntity
quarkus.mongodb.database = person
--

The `quarkus.mongodb.database` property will be used by MongoDB with Panache to determine the name of the database where your entities will be persisted.

> For advanced configuration of the MongoDB client, you can follow the link:mongo-guide.html#configuring-the-mongodb-database[Configuring the MongoDB database].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For advanced configuration of the MongoDB client, you can follow the link:mongo-guide.html#configuring-the-mongodb-database[Configuring the MongoDB database guide].
```

== Defining your entity

To define a Panache entity, simply extend `PanacheMongoEntity` and add your columns as public fields.
You can add the `@MongoEntity` annotation to your entity if you need to customize the name of the collection and/or the database.

[source,java]
--
@MongoEntity(collection="ThePerson")
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntity {
    public String name;
    // will be persisted as a 'birth' field in MongoDB

>     @BsonProperty("birth") public LocalDate birthDate;

Reviewer 3: My intuition is that it would be a lot more readable on 2 separate lines (and with a new line between each property)

Author: Done.

    public Status status;
}
--

NOTE: annotating with `@MongoEntity` is optional, it allows you to configure the name of the collection and the name of the database. Here the entity will be stored in the `ThePerson` collection instead of the default `Person` collection.

> MongoDB with Panache uses the link:https://mongodb.github.io/mongo-java-driver/3.10/bson/pojos/[PojoCodecProvider] to map your entities to a MongoDB `Document`.

Reviewer 3: For the record: you only need `link:` if it's not clear it's a link. As soon as you have `https?://`, you don't need it. No need to change it.

You will be allowed to use the following annotations to customize this mapping:

> - `@BsonId`: allows you to customize the ID field, see link:#custom-ids[Custom IDs].

Reviewer 3: You should use a proper Asciidoc cross reference.

Author: done

- `@BsonProperty`: customize the serialized name of the field.
- `@BsonIgnore`: ignore a field during the serialization.

If you need to write accessors, you can:

[source,java]
--
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntity {
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;

    // return name as uppercase in the model
    public String getName(){
      return name.toUppercase();
    }

    // store all names in lowercase in the DB
    public String setName(String name){
      this.name = name.toLowercase();
    }
}
--

> And thanks to our field access rewrite, when your users read `person.name` they will actually call your `getName()` accessor, and similarly for field writes and the setter.

Reviewer 3: Do we enhance all the source code to rewrite access to the fields with the getters? In Hibernate ORM with Panache, it's done by the Hibernate ORM enhancer, not Panache itself, thus my question.

Author: Yes, Stéphane extract the enhancer in panache-common and made it independant of Hibernate. And I reuse it to generates the accessors and enhance the entity/repository with panache methods.

int count = livingPersons.count();

// and you can chain methods of course
return Person.find("status", Status.Alive)
    .page(Page.ofSize(25))
    .nextPage()
    .stream()
--

The `PanacheQuery` type has many other methods to deal with paging and returning streams.

== Sorting

All methods accepting a query string also accept an optional `Sort` parameter, which allows you to abstract your sorting:

[source,java]
--
List<Person> persons = Person.list(Sort.by("name").and("birth"));

// and with more restrictions
List<Person> persons = Person.list("status", Sort.by("name").and("birth"), Status.Alive);
--

The `Sort` class has plenty of methods for adding columns and specifying sort direction.

== Adding entity methods

In general, we recommend not adding custom queries for your entities outside of the entities themselves,
to keep all model queries close to the models they operate on. So we recommend adding them as static methods
in your entity class:

[source,java]
--
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntity {
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;

    public static Person findByName(String name){

>       return find("name", name).firstResult();

Reviewer 3: Inconsistent formatting. Either you use 4 or 2 spaces but let's be consistent (I would go with 4).

Author: I update all indentation to 4 spaces.

    }

    public static List<Person> findAlive(){
      return list("status", Status.Alive);
    }

    public static void deleteLoics(){
      delete("name", "Loïc");
    }
}
--

== Simplified queries

Normally, MongoDB queries are of this form: `{'firstname': 'John', 'lastname':'Doe'}`, this is what we call MongoDB native queries.

> You can use them if you want, but we also support what we call **PanacheQL** that can be seen as a subset of link:https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/tutorial/persistence-querylanguage.htm#BNBTG[JPQL] (or link:https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/core/3.3/reference/en/html/queryhql.html[HQL]) and allows you to easily express a query.

Reviewer 3: Let's point to something more recent that Hibernate ORM 3.3 :)

https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/5.4/userguide/html_single/Hibernate_User_Guide.html#hql

Author: done
first result from google :)

- `<query>` will expand to `{<query>}` where we will map the PanacheQL query to MongoDB native query form. We support the following operators that will be mapped to the corresponding MongoDB operators: 'and', 'or' ( mixing 'and' and 'or' is not currently supported), '=', '>', '>=', '<', '<=', '!=', 'is null', 'is not null', and 'like' that is mapped to the MongoDB `$regex` operator.

Here are some query examples:

- `firstname = ?1 and status = ?2` will be mapped to `{'firstname': ?1, 'status': ?2}`
- `amount > ?1 and firstname != ?2` will be mapped to `{'amount': {'$gt': ?1}, 'firstname': {'$ne': ?2}}`
- `lastname like ?1` will be mapped to `{'lastname': {'$regex': ?1}}`. Be careful that this will be link:https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/operator/query/regex/#op._S_regex[MongoDB regex] support and not SQL like pattern. 
- `lastname is not null` will be mapped to `{'lastname':{'$exists': true}}`

We also handle some basic date type transformations: all fields of type `Date`, `LocalDate` or `LocalDateTime` will be mapped to the link:https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/bson-types/#document-bson-type-date[BSON Date] using the `ISODate` type (UTC datetime).

> MongoDB with Panache also supports extended MongoDB queries by providing a `Document` query, this is supported by the find/list/stream/cout/delete methods.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
MongoDB with Panache also supports extended MongoDB queries by providing a `Document` query, this is supported by the find/list/stream/count/delete methods.
```

== Query parameters

You can pass query parameters, for both native and PanacheQL queries, by index (1-based) as shown below:

[source,java]
--
Person.find("name = ?1 and status = ?2", "Loïc", Status.Alive);
Person.find("{'name': ?1, 'status': ?2}", "Loïc", Status.Alive);
--

Or by name using a `Map`:

[source,java]
--
Map<String, Object> params = new HashMap<>();
params.put("name", "Loïc");
params.put("status", Status.Alive);
Person.find("name = :name and status = :status", params);
Person.find("{'name': :name, 'status', :status}", params);
--

> Or using the convenience class `Parameters` to either build a `Map` or just used as-is:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Or using the convenience class `Parameters` to either build a `Map` or just use as-is:
```

[source,java]
--
// generate a Map
Person.find("name = :name and status = :status",
         Parameters.with("name", "Loïc").and("status", Status.Alive).map());

// use it as-is
Person.find("{'name': :name, 'status': :status}",
         Parameters.with("name", "Loïc").and("status", Status.Alive));
--

Every query operation accepts passing parameters by index (`Object...`), or by name (`Map<String,Object>` or `Parameters`).

> When you use query parameters, be careful that PanacheQL queries will refers to the Object parameters name but native queries will refers to MongoDB field names.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you use query parameters, be careful that PanacheQL queries will refer to the Object parameters name but native queries will refer to MongoDB field names.
```

Imagine the following entity:

[source,java]
--
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntity {
    @BsonProperty("lastname")
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;

    public static Person findByNameWithPanacheQLQuery(String name){
      return find("name", name).firstResult();
    }

>     public static Person findByNameWithNameQuery(String name){

Reviewer 3: You call them NativeQuery until now. Let's be consistent? (`s/NameQuery/NativeQuery/`)

Author: typo, corrected

        return find("{'lastname': ?1}", name).firstResult();
    }
}
--

> Both `findByNameWithPanacheQLQuery()` and `findByNameWithNameQuery()` methods will return the same result but query written in PanacheQL

Reviewer 3: And update it here too.

Author: done

implement `PanacheMongoRepository`:

[source,java]
--
@ApplicationScoped
public class PersonRepository implements PanacheMongoRepository<Person> {

   // put your custom logic here as instance methods

   public Person findByName(String name){
     return find("name", name).firstResult();
   }

   public List<Person> findAlive(){
     return list("status", Status.Alive);
   }

   public void deleteLoics(){
     delete("name", "Loïc");
  }
}
--

Absolutely all the operations that are defined on `PanacheMongoEntityBase` are available on your DAO, so using it
is exactly the same except you need to inject it:

[source,java]
--
@Inject
PersonRepository personRepository;

@GET
public long count(){
  return personRepository.count();
}
--

So if Repositories are your thing, you can keep doing them. Even with repositories, you can keep your entities as
subclasses of `PanacheMongoEntity` in order to get the ID and public fields working, but you can even skip that and
go back to specifying your ID and using getters and setters if that's your thing. We're not judging.

== Transactions

> MongoDB offers ACID transactions since version 4.0. MongoDB with Panache doesn't provide support for them.

Reviewer 3: Maybe make it a warning?

Author: done
I hope it can be done soon as Narayana should be able to provide support for it

== Custom IDs

> IDs are often a touchy subject, in MongoDB they are usually auto-generated by the database with an `ObjectId` type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
IDs are often a touchy subject. In MongoDB, they are usually auto-generated by the database with an `ObjectId` type.
```

In MongoDB with Panache the ID are defined by a field named `id` of the `org.bson.types.ObjectId` type,
but if you want ot customize them, once again we have you covered.

You can specify your own ID strategy by extending `PanacheMongoEntityBase` instead of `PanacheMongoEntity`. Then
you just declare whatever ID you want as a public field by annotating it by @BsonId:

[source,java]
--
@MongoEntity
public class Person extends PanacheMongoEntityBase {

  @BsonId
  public Integer myId;

 ...
}
--

If you're using repositories, then you will want to extend `PanacheMongoRepositoryBase` instead of `PanacheMongoRepository`
and specify your ID type as an extra type parameter:

[source,java]
--
@ApplicationScoped
public class PersonRepository implements PanacheMongoRepositoryBase<Person,Integer> {

 ...
}
--

[NOTE]
====
When using `ObjectId`, MongoDB will automatically provide a value for you, but if you use a custom field type,
you need to provide the value by yourself.
====

> `ObjectId` can be difficult to use if you want to expose its value in your rest service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`ObjectId` can be difficult to use if you want to expose its value in your REST service.
```

> So we created JSON-B and Jackson providers to serialize/deserialize them as a `String` which are are automatically registered if your project depends on one of the Resteasy with JSON-B or Resteasy with Jackson extensions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So we created JSON-B and Jackson providers to serialize/deserialize them as a `String` which are are automatically registered if your project depends on one of the RESTEasy with JSON-B or RESTEasy with Jackson extensions.
```

> == How and why we simplify MongoDB API

Reviewer 3: Please add a new line before the title for readability.

Author: done
